9
NEPA litigation has rarely focused on environmental justice.
Environmental nonprofits and decision-makers  alike have vocally highlighted the perceived 
threat NEPA reform would impose on marginalized communities.21 The Center for Biological 
Diversity even accused a member of Congress of  trying to silence communities of color and 
poor communities in places like Louisianas Cancer Alley, 22 after proposing a bill that would 
reduce the amount of time in which an environmental review can be challenged. However,  
a meager 2.8% of challenges in our 2013-2022 dataset related to environmental justice issues.  
In fact, NEPA has never played a large role  in protecting environmental justice communities  
at all.23 
In part, thats because agencies dont have clear statutory authority in that realm .24 Executive 
Orders (E.O. 12898 of February 11, 1994, and more recently E.O. 14096 of April 21, 2023) have 
encouraged agencies to incorporate environmental justice into the NEPA process, but cannot 
legally set enforceable standards.
And even if those parameters and responsibilities were precisely defined, NEPA would not  
provide an effective protection mechanism. NEPA is a technology-agnostic procedural law,  
made to evaluate and mitigate environmental impacts. The law is not designed to stop, replace, 
or relocate projects. Such considerations remain a matter of national policy that federal 
lawmakers are already working to address under the Inflation Reduction Act, the Justice40 
Initiative, and other laws. 
Forest management projects were the most common subject of litigation.
Despite public outcry over NEPAs impact on clean energy deployment, energy projects dont con -
stitute the largest share of legal challenges in this dataset. Instead, the majority (37%) of total 
NEPA challenges contested public lands management projects. 
The U.S. Forest Service and Bureau of Land Management together manage the majority of  
federally owned land in the United States, about 437 million acres .25 A NEPA review is required 
whenever these agencies perform management activities, like removing dead trees or building 
roads. This highlights a key distinction between the requirements NEPA imposes on public lands 
management agencies and those that focus on building infrastructure. Where NEPA acts as a 
mechanism to regulate private industry activity when permitting mines or wind farms, it also 
governs how land management agencies execute their core, legislatively mandated responsibil -
ities. Thus, NEPA litigation poses a unique challenge for these agencies, allowing the public to 
contest the minutiae of their every decision.