2
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Ongoing permitting reform debates in Washington, DC, have mostly orbited around the National 
Environmental Policy Act (NEPA). A procedural environmental regulatory umbrella law, NEPA 
creates significant and complex requirements for all major infrastructure projects and federal 
activities affecting the environment. 
Broadly, NEPA requires that federal agencies conduct environmental reviews of proposed activi -
ties and their potential effects. For complex projects, agencies can either prepare an environmen -
tal impact statement (EIS) or an environmental assessment (EA). Alternatively, simpler projects 
can be afforded a categorical exclusion (CE) which fast-tracks the review process. After permits 
are granted through these review mechanisms, they may be challenged in the judicial system. 
The courts then have the authority to reaffirm, bolster, or otherwise improve the project plan to 
prevent or limit environmental damage. Of course, lawsuits to challenge EISs, EAs, and CEs neces -
sarily extend project timelines. Particularly in the wake of the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs 
Act (2021), the Inflation Reduction Act (2022), and the CHIPS and Science Act (2022), federal policy -
makers and policy advocates have drawn increased attention to the regulatory burden and delay 
imposed by this judicial review.
However, the NEPA litigation debate has suffered from a deficit of empirical evidence. Our analy -
sis helps fill this knowledge gap, documenting and sorting hundreds of NEPA litigation cases to 
assess trends, patterns, and impacts on various types of major infrastructure projects. 
Breakthrough Institute analysts, in collaboration with legal experts at Holland & Knight, com -
piled and analyzed 387 NEPA cases brought to the U.S. appellate court system over the 2013-2022 
period and categorized them by project type, environmental review, length of judicial review, 
federal agency, and plaintiff. Our results indicate that NEPA litigation overwhelmingly functions 
as a form of delay, as most cases take years before courts ultimately rule in favor of the defending 
federal agency.  
As Congress deliberates reforms to NEPA, it is essential that policymakers recognize the degree 
to which the legal status quo prioritizes procedure over outcomes. To enable more effective 
environmental review, reforms should minimize the potential for extended, unproductive legal 
battles while still promoting the fair assessment of environmental impacts.