4
INTRODUCTION
President Richard Nixon signed the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) into law in 1970,  
institutionalizing environmental protection as a matter of national importance. The laws 
initial decree was simple: federal agencies must consider the environmental impacts of their 
decisions before taking action. In the decades following, agency responsibility ballooned. 
In 1981, the Council on Environmental Quality contended that an environmental impact  
statement (EIS) would take less than 12 months to complete. In 2022, it took about four years .4 
These lengthy review processes delay infrastructure projects of all varieties, including power 
lines and wildfire mitigation projects. 
In the wake of the passage of the 2022 Inflation Reduction Act, members of Congress and 
President Biden have expressed concern that NEPA will slow the decarbonization process. 
Despite general consensus that NEPA needs to be reformed, Congress has struggled to reach  
consensus on significant reforms.
Of the many facets of permitting reform, NEPA litigation has become the most hotly contested 
and the least understood. Researchers have published only a handful of studies capable of 
informing evidence-based reform. Among those few, most narrowly assert that the burden of 
NEPA litigation is not large enough to merit reform. Ruple and Race , for example, claim that the 
burden is minimal because less than 1% of all federal civil litigation pertains to NEPA.5 Adelman 
and Glicksman  similarly assert the burden is small because only a small share of environmental 
review documents are litigated.6 While both illustrate that NEPA litigation is rare in the grand 
scheme of federal responsibility, they conflate aggregate burden with the scale of an agencys 
obligations.
Agencies definitively struggle to keep up with their NEPA-related obligations. A complex,  
quantitative study is not needed to identify that. Agency staff have made it clear since 1997 .7  
The U.S. Forest Service, the agency that shoulders the greatest NEPA burden, provides a prime 
example. By its own admission, excessive environmental reviews have prevented the Forest 
Service from effectively managing forests, at one point consuming almost 40% of the agencys 
budget .8 Such efforts are in no small part driven by fear of litigation. Forest managers habitually 
prepare more complex environmental reviews in hopes of avoiding legal challenges.9 