11
Within the forest management category, plaintiffs challenged timber harvest and fuel manage -
ment projects the most frequently (Table 7). Timber sales on public land have long generated 
controversy, both inside and outside the context of NEPA. While the notion of timber harvest -
ing often conjures images of profit-driven logging companies decimating pristine forests, land 
management agencies can use harvests to improve wildlife habitat and reduce fire risk.26 In fact, 
almost half of the contested timber harvesting projects in this dataset were also part of a fuel 
management project. This finding underscores one of the most concerning challenges imposed 
on land management agencies by NEPA: obstruction of wildfire mitigation efforts.
Table 7: Types of forest management appeals, 20132022.
Type Number of cases% of total forest  
management cases
Timber harvest 26 38.8%
Fuel management 26 38.8%
Roadsvehicle use 10 14.9%
Salvage logging 5 7.5%
Grazing 4 6.0%
Note: Forest management cases are multifaceted and thus cannot be categorized by a single variable. This table shows the num -
ber of cases that address various types, but each category is not mutually exclusive, so percentages total more than 100%. 
Scientists and forest managers have made clear  that fuel reduction is the most effective way to 
decrease wildfire risk.27 As the wildfire crisis has escalated in the United States, the need for fuel 
reduction has only grown. Unfortunately, the Forest Service spends 3.6 to 4.7 years  on paperwork 
before a fuel management project can start.28 NEPA allows plaintiffs to stall projects even further 
with litigation, which can add over a year to the process.29 In this dataset, an average of three 
years elapsed between an agencys issuing a permit for a fuel reduction project and the end of 
litigation. Notably though, agencies won 93% of cases related to fuel reduction projects, 96% of 
which were brought by NGOs.
NEPA litigation added 3.9 years on average to energy project development.
In this dataset, 29% of total NEPA appeals cases contested energy projects. The distribution of 
contested projects shows a balance among challenges to projects involving fossil fuel infrastruc -
ture (37%), clean energy production (33%), and fossil fuel extraction (22%) (Table 8). This balance 
challenges the common narrative that only certain types of projects face legal opposition. 